# EAI320_Practical-5

# Implemented By: Mohamed Ameen Omar
# EAI 320 - Intelligent Systems, University of Pretoria

### Concept by Dr J. Dabrowski

### Compiled, edited, and reviewed by Johan Langenhoven

### 08 March 2018


## Scenario

In this assignment, you are required to implement and test a decision tree building
algorithm. In particular, the Iterative Dichotomiser 3 (ID3) decision tree building algo-
rithm is considered^1. For more information on the ID3 algorithm, consider the following
sources see the Additional Material section at the end of this document. Instructions
for the practical are as follows:

- Implement the Iterative Dichotomiser 3 (ID3) decision tree building algorithm in
    Python. As usual, you must implement a generic algorithm. That is, your function
    should be able to handle any dataset presented to it in a particular format.
- Test your ID3 algorithm on the restaurant dataset presented in the prescribed
    book. This dataset is presented in Chapter 18 and is reproduced as follows:
- Use the decision tree generated by the ID3 algorithm to make decisions on the
    following sample two examples. Show the decision path that is followed through
    the tree.
       X 1 ={Alt=N o, Bar=N o, F ri=Y es,
          Hun=Y es, P at=F ull, P rice= $$,
Rain=Y es, Res=N o, T ype=T hai, Est= 10− 30 }

```
X 2 ={Alt=Y es, Bar=N o, F ri=N o,
Hun=Y es, P at=F ull, P rice= $$,
Rain=Y es, Res=N o, T ype=Italian, Est= 30− 60 }
```
```
X 3 ={Alt=Y es, Bar=N o, F ri=Y es,
Hun=Y es, P at=Some, P rice= $,
Rain=N o, Res=N o, T ype=Burger, Est= 0− 10 }
```
(^1) The decision tree learning algorithm in the prescribed book is a variation of the ID3 algorithm


## Additional Material

```
[1] T. Mitchell, Machine Learning, ser. McGraw-Hill international editions - computer
science series. McGraw-Hill Education, 1997, ch. 3. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/spr07/cos424/papers/mitchell-dectrees.pdf
```
```
[2] J. R. Quinlan, “Induction of decision trees”, Machine learning, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
81-106, 1986. [Online]. Available:
https://wwwold.cs.umd.edu/class/fall2009/cmsc828r/PAPERS/
fulltextQuilanAshwinKumar.pdf
```
```
[3] J. W. Grzymala-Busse,“Selected algorithms of machine learning from examples”,
Fundam. Inform., vol. 18, pp. 193-207, 1993. [Online]. Available: http:
//people.eecs.ku.edu/∼jerzy/j24-sel.pdf
```
```
[4] Wikipedia, “Id3 algorithm”, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ID3 algorithm.
```
If you can’t find these papers by following the link, simply search the title of the paper
on Google Scholar. There are also a couple of good video tutorials on Youtube.


## Report

You have to write a short technical report for this assignment. Your report must be
written in LATEX. In the report you will give your results as well as provide a discussion
on the results. Make sure to follow the guidelines as set out in the separate questions
to form a complete report.

Reports will only be handed in as digital copies, but a hard copy plagiarism statement
needs to be handed in at the following week’s practical session (on the final day of the
practical submission).

## Deliverable

- Write a technical report on your finding for this assignment.
- Include your code in the digital submission as an appendix.

## Instructions

- All reports must be in PDF format and be named report.pdf.
- Place the software in a folder called SOFTWARE and the report in a folder called
    REPORT.
- Add the folders to a zip-archive and name itEAI320_prac5_studnr.zip.
- All reports and simulation software must be e-mailed toup.eai320@gmail.com
    no later than 17:00 on 23 March 2018. No late submissions will be accepted.
- Use the following format for the subject header for the email: EAI 320 Prac 5 -
    studnr.
- Bring your plagiarism statements to the practical session on Thursday, 22 March
    2018, where they will be collected.
- Submit your report online on ClickUP using the TurnItIn link.

## Additional Instructions

- Do not copy! The copier and the copyee (of software and/or documentation) will
    receive zero for both the software and the documentation.
- For any questions or appointments email me atup.eai320@gmail.com.
- Make sure that you discuss the results that are obtained. This is a large part of
    writing a technical report.


## Marking

Your report will be marked as follow:

- 60% will be awarded for the full implementation of the practical and the subsequent
    results in the report. For partially completed practicals, marks will be awarded as
    seen fit by the marker.Commented code allows for easier marking!
- 40% will be awarded for the overall report. This includes everything from the
    report structure, grammar and discussion of results. The discussion will be the
    bulk of the marks awarded.


